---
title: "Feedback"
date: 2018-02-13T20:49:58Z
draft: false
---

Coding is instinctively somewhat weird. It's a continuous process of envisioning
chains of logic, writing missives to an alien creature which obeys absolutely
but understands only a language that corresponds more to actions than to
ideas (as natural languages do), and then parsing and executing them with a
tiny, imperfect model of that creature. All this is explicit, obvious, and
accepted. In order to assist us with this process, so that we get desired
results rather than telling entire states that they're under nuclear attack,
we employ comments as a language that we can read which the interpreters will
ignore, and error messages which amount to teaching our ever so literal
interlocutor some stock phrases in our language which it can use to explain
why it has no idea what we're on about.

Unfortunately the latter of these is quite a difficult skill to master in
itself. Concision is vital, as is procedural generation in order to minimise
the number of different messages that must be handwritten, but the amount of
information imparted must be large enough to precisely and immediately
identify the cause of the problem.

An example of this being done excellently is in the Rust compiler, and the
plugin for it called 'Clippy'. Where some software might provide an error such
as `constant 'Ability' is not defined`, and a hundred-line backtrace of mostly
wrappers and loaders leaving the reader to divine where precisely this might be
generating a problem, a (fairly trivial) Rust error looks more like this:

```rust
error[E0596]: cannot borrow field `self.completed` of immutable binding as mutable
   --> src/tasks/mod.rs:118:24
    |
117 |      fn this_breaks(&self) {
    |                     ----- use `&mut self` here to make mutable
118 |          let st = &mut self.completed;
    |                        ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ cannot mutably borrow field of immutable binding

```

It tells you:

- What the problem is
- Where it occurs, in your code specifically
- What you need to do to fix it

So you can understand it, and you can follow its suggestions, or rethink your
approach, and get to the result you're after. It amounts to a comprehensible
and trustworthy promise that, if you fix that bit of syntax, the system will
work. Or at least that bit of it will work, which isn't quite the same thing.

Writing error messages for yourself is challenging, even if you know exactly
what you're after. You write them, they help you, you move on. If you run into
them again or in a different context, when you're trying to solve a different
problem, you begin to lose sight of where error messages come from. You
forget that you wrote them, or what they meant at the time, and any message is
never as clear after a few weeks or months as you believed when you first
wrote it. So you go along as if it was written by someone else. You start, in
effect, to believe your own bullshit. That message which says "Could not connect
to database" becomes, in your mind, a problem with the connection to the
database. You've forgotten that in fact it means something more like "You forgot
to set the environment variable with the DB name in it, you simpleton" and hence
waste time wondering if your MySQL install has a problem.

We do something similar to this every time we interact with other humans. For
most people it's largely unconscious, although generally we can explain (or
invent) our reasoning after the fact if necessary. We build a tiny model of the
other person or group in our minds and feed them inputs to see what we think
will happen and how they might behave. Compared to when writing functions the
models are worse, because humans are enormously more complicated, but
fundamentally the process is the same. Envision, model, execute, then try it out
if it looks as if it will work.

It is, however, considerably harder. The inputs are fuzzier, because we don't
know what we're doing. The outputs are fuzzier, because the models are worse and
people (unlike computers) do not always respond in the same way to a given
stimulus, and the error messages are, by and large, totally useless.
That's not really the fault of the people giving them. The majority of people
are extremely poor at understanding why they act or feel the way they do, and in
consequence they generally either don't know or refuse to explain exactly why
they responded the way they did. Asking or attempting to discover the process
is often considered insulting, which then changes their behaviour making any
existing data invalid.

In the absence of good, explicit error messages which indicate exactly what to
do differently to ensure the desired outcome, what are we to do?

Statistics. If your inputs are fuzzy and your outputs are fuzzy, you can't be
specific, but don't let that stop you applying leverage. Humans are
phenomenally good at pattern matching, and are basically interchangeable if you
can't see inside them. (If you have a reliable mechanism for seeing inside
people's software, let me know. I'd be interested, especially if it has a write
interface as well as a read. So would the CIA but I'd much rather they not have
it.) Goals are much easier to accomplish if they have many possible valid
approaches - "have Elon Musk give me £100k" is hard, while "have *somebody* give
me £100k" is entirely achievable through quite a variety of methods. Once that's
been set as the goal, you can start writing your own error messages, in effect.
Results aren't entirely repeatable but they exhibit patterns over time, so it's
reasonably trivial to iterate towards a target, which is often impossible with
individuals.

Feedback is important. If you don't have any, make some. If you're working with
a system that doesn't provide any, wrap it in one that does. If you can't get it
from an instance, get it from the class. Ultimately the only thing that matters
is that you can adjust the inputs you provide in such a way that the possibility
of not achieving your objective is minimal, regardless of opposition or opacity.
